XP-285-integrate py torch into the sdk (#18)
xainag/xain-sdk: docs/examples/Pytorch.md

# PyTorch Participant Example

This is an example of a PyTorch  implementation of a `Participant`  class for Federated Learning.
We follow the example presented in [this tutorial](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/beginner/blitz/cifar10_tutorial.html#sphx-glr-beginner-blitz-cifar10-tutorial-py) and it is beneficial to  read it   before starting this tutorial. 

Every example contains of two steps:
- Setting up the Cooridinator that waits for the Participants 
- Setting up the SDK Participant  together with a suitable model that connects to the Coordinator. 

The first part is described in  the [XAIN-fl](https://github.com/xainag/xain-fl). 
Then we can assume that we have our Coordinator waiting for the Participants to join. 
The next step is to set up the Participant SDK and equip it with a model. 
We cover the requirements of the [Participant Abstract Base Class](#participant-abstract-base-class), give ideas on how to handle a  PyTorch model and  show how to implement a Federated Learning. You can find the complete [Source Code](#source-code) at the end of this document.

> 

Reviewer: the below sounds very familiar, is it a copy-paste from the docs? can't we just link to that rather than repeat it? (in the future if we need to change it, it's better to not have to change in two places)

Author: It does and I understand your concern but on the other hand if we want to use it for Training purposes some repetitions are needed to avoid the need of reading 3 documents at the same time.  Can be changed if you still feel that's needed.

```python 
def read_from_vector(
      self, indices: np.ndarray, flattened: np.ndarray, shapes: np.ndarray
    ) -> None:
```
and 
```python 
def flatten_weights(self) -> [np.ndarray, np.ndarray, np.ndarray]: 
``` 
The last part of our model class is setting the optimizer together with loss function and  training loop. 
```python
def train_n_epochs(self, trainloader, number_of_epochs: int) -> None:
    criterion = nn.CrossEntropyLoss()
    optimizer = optim.SGD(self.parameters(), lr=0.001, momentum=0.9)

    for epoch in tqdm(range(number_of_epochs), desc="Epochs"):  # loop over the dataset multiple times
        running_loss = 0.0
        for i, data in tqdm(enumerate(trainloader, 0), desc="Batches"):
            # get the inputs; data is a list of [inputs, labels]
            inputs, labels = data
            # zero the parameter gradients
            optimizer.zero_grad()
            # forward + backward + optimize
            outputs = self(inputs)
            loss = criterion(outputs, labels)
            loss.backward()
            optimizer.step()
```
As we can expect the last function is exactly what we need in our Participant class as the `train_round()` method.  

> ## PyTorch  Data loader and Participant initialization 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## PyTorch  data loader and Participant initialization 
```

In the tutorial we  use the standard data  transformation and loading  as it is described in the PyTorch documentation. 
The ony difference is that we initiate each Participant with  a randomised training set. 

```python 
self.trainset = torchvision.datasets.CIFAR10(
            root="./data", train=True, download=True, transform=transform
        )
self.trainloader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(
            self.trainset, batch_size=4, shuffle=True, num_workers=2
        )
```
For validation purposes we also create a test set 
```python
self.testset = torchvision.datasets.CIFAR10(
            root="./data", train=False, download=True, transform=transform
        )
self.testloader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(
            self.testset, batch_size=4, shuffle=False, num_workers=2
        )
```

> Beside the test and train set Participant also contain a model 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Besides the test and training set, the Participant also contains a model 
```

```python
self.model = Net()
```
that is an instance  of the CNN we defined  following the PyTorch tutorial. 
From the model we also obtain its initial weights and shape of the layers. 
```python
self.flattened, self.shapes, self.indices = self.model.flatten_weights()
self.number_samples: int = len(self.trainloader)
```
These parameters become handy when we  need to import parameters from a single  Numpy array.  

> Such initiated Participant   is required to have the training  round method to communicate with the Coordinator.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Such an initiated Participant   is required to have the `train_round` method to communicate with the Coordinator.   
```

```python
  def train_round(  # pylint: disable=unused-argument
        self, weights: List[np.ndarray], epochs: int, epoch_base: int
    ) -> Tuple[List[np.ndarray], int, Dict[str, List[np.ndarray]]]:
```
As mentioned before  we want to perform three crucial steps  in this method
```python 
self.model.read_from_vector(self.indices, weights, self.shapes)
self.model.train_n_epochs(self.trainloader, epochs)
self.flattened, self.shapes, self.indices = self.model.flatten_weights()
```
which   we defined  together with the CNN  class.  The last step is to calculate matrices that we are interested in our model. 
```python
print("Training accuracy", self.model.evaluate_on_test(self.testloader))
```
## Source Code

```python
"""PyTorch example for the SDK Participant implementation."""
from typing import Dict, List, Tuple

import numpy as np
import torch
import torchvision
import torchvision.transforms as transforms
import random

from xain_sdk.participant import Participant as ABCParticipant
from xain_sdk.participant_state_machine import start_participant

from cnn_class import Net

class Participant(ABCParticipant):

>     """An example of a Keras/Tensorflow implementation of a Participant for Federated learning.

Reviewer: do you really mean Keras/Tensorflow? check this docstring

        # pylint: disable=line-too-long
        """Train the model in a Federated Learning round.
        A global model is given in terms of its `weights` and it is trained on local data for a
        number of `epochs`. The weights of the updated local model are returned together with the
        number of samples in the training dataset and a set of metrics.
        Args:
            weights (~typing.List[~numpy.ndarray]): The weights of the global model.
            epochs (int): The number of epochs to be trained.
            epoch_base (int): The epoch base number for the optimizer state (in case of epoch
                dependent optimizer parameters).
        Returns:
            ~typing.Tuple[~typing.List[~numpy.ndarray], int, ~typing.Dict[str, ~typing.List[~numpy.ndarray]]]:
                The updated model weights, the number of training samples and the gathered metrics.
        """
        self.model.read_from_vector(self.indices, weights, self.shapes)
        self.model.train_n_epochs(self.trainloader, epochs)
        self.flattened, self.shapes, self.indices = self.model.flatten_weights()

        metrics = {}

>         # metrics['Accuracy'] = self.model.evaluate_on_test(self.testloader)

Reviewer: any reason why this line is commented out (or not just completely removed)?

> # PyTorch Participant Example

Reviewer 2: According to https://xainag.atlassian.net/browse/XP-301, please also put the Pytorch.md as readme into the examples/Pytorch dir.

> This is an example of a PyTorch  implementation of a `Participant`  class for federated learning.

Reviewer 3: We decided to use `Federated Learning` in our glossary, would be great to have it consistent in all docs

> We follow the example presented in [this tutorial](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/beginner/blitz/cifar10_tutorial.html#sphx-glr-beginner-blitz-cifar10-tutorial-py) and it is beneficial to  at  read it before starting this tutorial. 

Reviewer 3: Looks like `at` should not be here:
`... it is beneficial to read it before starting this tutorial.`

Every example contains of two steps:

> - Setting up the cooridinator that waits for the participants 

Reviewer 3: Also we use capital letters for Coordinator and Participant.

> - Setting up the SDK participant  together with a suitable model that connects to the coordinator. 

Reviewer 3: and here

The first part is described in  the [XAIN-fl](https://github.com/xainag/xain-fl). 
Then we can assume that we have our coordinator waiting for the participants to join. 

> The next step is to set up the Participant SDK amd equip it with a model. 

Reviewer 3: `amd` looks like a typo

> We cover the requirements of the [Participant Abstract Base Class](#participant-abstract-base-class), give ideas on how to handle a  PyTorch model and  show how to implement a federated learning. You can find the complete [Source Code](#source-code) at the end of this document.

Reviewer 3: Federated Learning

```
and must implement the `train_round()` method in order to be able to execute a round of federated learning, where each round consists of a certain number of epochs. 
This method adheres to the function signature
```python
def train_round(
    self, weights: List[np.ndarray], epochs: int, epoch_base: int
) -> Tuple[List[np.ndarray], int, Dict[str, List[np.ndarray]]]:
```
The expected arguments are:
- `weights (List[np.ndarray])`: A Numpy array containing all the model weights.
- `epochs (int)`: The number of epochs to be trained during the federated learning round.
- `epoch_base (int)`: An epoch base number in case the state of the training optimizer is dependent on the overall epoch (e.g. for learning rate schedules).

The expected return values are:
- `List[np.ndarray]`: The weights of the local model which results from the global model after certain `epochs` of training on local data.
- `int`: The number of samples in the train dataset for federated averaging.
- `Dict[str, List[np.ndarray]]`: The metrics gathered during the training. This might be an empty dictionary if the `Coordinator` is not supposed to collect the metrics.

## Pytorch Model 

> Following the tutorial from PyTorch documentation we prepare the '`class Net(nn.Module)` that contains the model architecture, definition of the forward pass together with optimization round. 

Reviewer 3: there is trailing ' in '`class Net(nn.Module)`

What is more we include two  methods that allows us to  enforce model weights to the model and export them after training rounds. 
###  CNN Setup
We use the architecture used un PyTorch documentation for the CIFAR10 benchmark
We use the following PyTorch packages 
```python
import torch
import torchvision
import torchvision.transforms as transforms
```
to  work with the PyTorch  CNN  packages. 
We start with preparation of  our CNN architecture 
```python
def __init__(self):
    super(Net, self).__init__()
    self.conv1 = nn.Conv2d(3, 6, 5)
    self.pool = nn.MaxPool2d(2, 2)
    self.conv2 = nn.Conv2d(6, 16, 5)
    self.fc1 = nn.Linear(16 * 5 * 5, 120)
    self.fc2 = nn.Linear(120, 84)
    self.fc3 = nn.Linear(84, 10)

def forward(self, x):
    x = self.pool(F.relu(self.conv1(x)))
    x = self.pool(F.relu(self.conv2(x)))
    x = x.view(-1, 16 * 5 * 5)
    x = F.relu(self.fc1(x))
    x = F.relu(self.fc2(x))
    x = self.fc3(x)
    return x
```
In order to import and export model weights we need to set up two methods that allow import/export to a numpy array. 
```python 
def read_from_vector(
      self, indices: np.ndarray, flattened: np.ndarray, shapes: np.ndarray
    ) -> None:

>         """

Reviewer 3: do we need `"""` here? it's a bit misleading

Author: we do not

```
and 

> ```python 

Reviewer 3: Do you have any idea why code is not highlighted here?

Author: it is seen as code fence.

> ``` python 

Reviewer 3: It's not highlighted probably because of space between ``` and python

```python
  def train_round(  # pylint: disable=unused-argument
        self, weights: List[np.ndarray], epochs: int, epoch_base: int
    ) -> Tuple[List[np.ndarray], int, Dict[str, List[np.ndarray]]]:
```
As mentioned before  we want to perform three crucial steps  in this method
``` python 
self.model.read_from_vector(self.indices, weights, self.shapes)
self.model.train_n_epochs(self.trainloader, epochs)
self.flattened, self.shapes, self.indices = self.model.flatten_weights()
```
which   we defined  together with the CNN  class.  The last step is to calculate matrices that we are interested in our model. 
```python
print("Training accuracy", self.model.evaluate_on_test(self.testloader))
```
## Source Code

```python
"""PyTorch example for the SDK Participant implementation."""
from typing import Dict, List, Tuple

import numpy as np
import torch
import torchvision
import torchvision.transforms as transforms
import random

from xain_sdk.participant import Participant as ABCParticipant
from xain_sdk.participant_state_machine import start_participant

from cnn_class import Net

class Participant(ABCParticipant):

>     """An example of a Keras/Tensorflow implementation of a participant for federated learning.

Reviewer 3: Participant, Federated Learning
